ILI-Talk-draft.markdown, before:

Your Library Website Stinks and it's Your Fault
Internet Librarian International, 2012
London, UK

-------

Library websites stink. They are difficult to use and create tension between us and our patrons. 

[Slides of twitter complaints about library websites.]

This is a talk about library websites, but it's really a talk about people. It's a talk about our library patrons, a talk about us, what's wrong with the way we're doing things, and how and who it hurts.

In 1939, Dave Packard and Bill Hewlett started a small company making test equipment in a garage in Palo Alto, California. Dave and Bill were electrical engineers who wanted better equipment for other engineers. Hewlett Packard began by making test equipment, that is, tools designed by experts for experts. Their first motto was "Design for the person at the next bench" (c.f. Norman, Donald. (2004). Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things. New York: Basic Books. p.83) The question that guided Hewlett and Packard was "How do WE do this?"

The early story of online library catalogs is a little bit like this. In the 1960s, we started computerizing our catalog records, which were easier to search than phsyical card catalogs. By the late 1970s and '80s, these catalogs were networked so that librarians could do searches for their patrons. These were tools built by experts, for experts. The question that guided us through all of this was "How do WE do this?"

In the 1950s, Hewlett Packard's business grew far beyond making tools for experts. And their business adapted. They starting thinking about who would use their products, and adapted to them. They started asking "How would our users do this?"

As for libraries, in the '90s, we opened up our catalogs to the public. You no longer had to go through a librarian to search the online catalog.

The problem, though, was that we didn't ask any new questions. The question that guided the development of these tools was still "How do librarians do this?" The tools were still built for experts, but we let anyone with a modem use them.

So, in case you were wondering, this is how librarians do this. [Slide of E. Bell Tweet: "Libraries do design link this..."]

But more and more libraries have started asking a new question: "How do *our users* do this?" When you start with this question, you put people at the center of your thinking. But how do we find out what our users need?

Whitney Hess, a user experience designer, said it best, I think: "UX isn’t about expert intuition, it’s about expert listening." [Slide of Whitney Hess] We need to talk to our users and ask them what they need. There are a lot of ways we can do this, but the point is to get the people who use your site directly involved in making it better. What is a website, after all, other than a way for people to connect with other people?

Your website is made of people. Frank Chimero, a designer, says it like this: "The web is people all the way down." [Frank Chimero slide]

"Tanya checks her email on her phone and gets a message from her sister. Brad is the systems admin guy who turns on the oscillating fans in the server room...Shannon writes something for her employer's website. Tim curses because he cant find what Shannon wrote."

We spend a lot of time trying to make our websites seem like automated tools that we forget that the sites just help to connect us to our patrons. The web is people all the way down.

Maya Angelu: "People will forget what you said, and what you did, but they will never forget how you made them feel"

Becaue of this, our websites make our patrons *feel* like beginners. We make them feel stupid at a critical moment when they are vunerable. They are at the library because they admit to themselves that they don't know something. By making it hard for them to find the information they need, we over-emphasize their deficiency.

Even if your website is usable, if it makes your users feel bad, it will have failed. 

[Maslow's slide] Aaron Walter, the lead user experience designer for MailChimp, uses Maslow's hierarchy of needs to explain this in terms of user interface design. Is Maslow's hierarchy, our human needs make up the base of the pyramid, while the things that make our life enjoyable and fulfilling are at the top. Walter recreated this pyramid to show the basic things that websites need to provide at the bottom while showing that making our sites enjoyable and fulfilling should be our highest goal.

[Walter slide] After all, Walter says, shooting just to make our sites usable is like a chef aiming to make edible food. We should aspire for more.

We don't seem to have problems thinking about how to treat other people when they come into the library. We know how to interact with people in person. But how can we build care for people into our websites? 

[Slide of Quote] Alan Cooper: "There is little difference technically between a complicated, confusing program and a simple, fun, and powerful product. The difference is one of culture, training, and attitude of the people who make them." (The Inmates are Running the Asylum)

Making your library website better is 90% political. 




Little Big Details website

Our game & tweet

Commit message:

Created slide deck, tweaked script to fit to slides.

ILI-Talk-draft.markdown, after:

Your Library Website Stinks and it's Your Fault
Internet Librarian International, 2012
London, UK

-------

Library websites stink. They are difficult to use and create tension between us and our patrons. 

[Slides of twitter complaints about library websites.]

This is a talk about library websites, but it's really a talk about people. It's a talk about our library patrons, a talk about us, what's wrong with the way we're doing things, and how and who it hurts.

[25 SEC]

In 1939, Dave Packard and Bill Hewlett started a small company making in a garage in Palo Alto, California. Dave and Bill were electrical engineers who wanted better equipment for other engineers. Hewlett Packard began by making test equipment, that is, tools designed by experts for experts. Their first motto was "Design for the person at the next bench" (c.f. Norman, Donald. (2004). Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Everyday Things. New York: Basic Books. p.83) The question that guided Hewlett and Packard was "How do WE do this?"

55

The early story of online library catalogs is a little bit like this. In the 1960s, we started computerizing our catalog records, which were easier to search than phsyical card catalogs. By the late 1970s and '80s, these catalogs were networked so that librarians could do searches for their patrons. These were tools built by experts, for experts. The question that guided us through all of this was "How do WE do this?"

[1MIN 20 SEC]

In the 1950s, Hewlett Packard's business grew far beyond making tools for experts. And their business adapted. They starting thinking about who would use their products, and adapted to them. They started asking "How would our users do this?"

As for libraries, in the '90s, we opened up our catalogs to the public. You no longer had to go through a librarian to search the online catalog.

The problem, though, was that we didn't ask any new questions. The question that guided the development of these tools was still "How do librarians do this?" The tools were still built for experts, but we let anyone with a modem use them.

[2 MIN]

But recently libraries have started asking a new question: "How do *our users* do this?" When you start with this question, you put people at the center of your thinking. But how do we find out what our users need?

Whitney Hess, a user experience designer, said it best, I think: "UX isn’t about expert intuition, it’s about expert listening." [Slide of Whitney Hess] We need to talk to our users and ask them what they need. There are a lot of ways we can do this, but the point is to get the people who use your site directly involved in making it better. What is a website, after all, other than a way for people to connect with other people?

[2 MIN 40 SEC]

Your website is made of people. Frank Chimero, a designer, says it like this: "The web is people all the way down." [Frank Chimero slide]

"Tanya checks her email on her phone and gets a message from her sister. Brad is the systems admin guy who turns on the oscillating fans in the server room...Shannon writes something for her employer's website. Tim curses because he cant find what Shannon wrote."

We spend a lot of time trying to make our websites seem like automated tools that we forget that the sites just help to connect us to our patrons. The web is people all the way down.

3:15

We're so focused on *how* people use our resources, that we don't often think about the people on the other end of the website. Hugh Rundle, a brilliant librarian from Australia, writes that "Your members don't come to your library to find books....they come to find solace or excitement, companionship or solidtude." People do things for a reason. We give meanings to even simple actions.

But because we forget that our websites are for people, they often make our patrons *feel* like beginners. We make them feel stupid at a critical moment when they are vunerable. They are at the library because they admit to themselves that they don't know something. By making it hard for them to find the information they need, we over-emphasize their deficiency.

Maya Angelu: "People will forget what you said, and what you did, but they will never forget how you made them feel"

Even if your website is usable, if it makes your users feel bad, it will have failed. 

4:15

[Maslow's slide] Aaron Walter, the lead user experience designer for MailChimp, uses Maslow's hierarchy of needs to explain this in terms of user interface design. Is Maslow's hierarchy, our human needs make up the base of the pyramid, while the things that make our life enjoyable and fulfilling are at the top. Walter recreated this pyramid to show the basic things that websites need to provide at the bottom while showing that making our sites enjoyable and fulfilling should be our highest goal.

[Walter slide] After all, Walter says, shooting just to make our sites usable is like a chef aiming to make edible food. We should aspire for more.

4:55

We don't seem to have problems thinking about how to treat  people when they come into the library. We know how to interact with people in person. But how can we build care for people into our websites? 

There isn't a simple programming or design trick. The problem goes deeper.

[Slide of Quote] Alan Cooper: "There is little difference technically between a complicated, confusing program and a simple, fun, and powerful product. The difference is one of culture, training, and attitude of the people who make them." (The Inmates are Running the Asylum)

Making your library website better is 90% political. 

5:35
